Add Curation section (#25)
neuroinformatics-unit/course-ephys-osss: book/curation.qmd

---
title: "Visualization and manual curation"
execute:
  eval: false
---

> _Mantra of the day_: SpikeInterface-GUI is used to create a **Curation** file. 

Reviewer: nice! ommmmmmmmmmmm

We'll come back to this...

## Reminder

> On Monday and Tuesday we saw how to take raw ephys data, preprocess it, sort it and compute properties of that sorting. When you're making a spike sorting pipeline you have lots of things to check and decisions to make. But once you've got the pipeline fixed, the final product is often quite simple. Here's an example of a full basic pipeline for a chronic recording:

Reviewer: Here maybe we refer instead by chapter so makes sense for non course attendees? or change after the course?

Author: I want to change after; I like the personal course-specific touch for now.

```{python}

> import spikeinterface.full as si

Reviewer: This is a nice point but I wonder if having this code block as the first section of this chapter might distract those with less Python experience. Could it make sense to start with the 'Why Curate' section and merge with this i.e. we have preprocessed the data, sorted and created a `SortingAnalzyer` which contains information about units, postprocessing etc. However, spike sorters make mistakes....

Reviewer: and then after that introduce spikeinterface-gui as a tool to help perform manual curation, how to run it etc.

Author: Again, I'm thinking more about the course than the book. What I thought: after the first two days the participants might be overwhelmed by all the info/options/possibilities and think that making an analyzer is very complicated. I want to start Wednesday by showing that a full spike sorting pipeline can be pretty simple. They've also just spent two days coding in Python, so this shouldn't overwhelming.

I agree that after the course, we could remove this.

from utils import download_and_slice_nwb_from_dandi
dataset_folder = Path("data/nwb_recording")

raw_recording = si.read_nwb()
prepreocessed_recording = si.bandpass_filter(
    si.common_reference(
        raw_recording
    )
)

sorting = si.run_sorter(
    sorter_name="lupin", 
    recording=prepreocessed_recording
)

analyzer = si.create_sorting_analyzer(
    sorting=sorting,
    recording=preprocessed_recording,
    format="binary_folder",
    folder="derivatives/my_sorting_analyzer"
)

extensions_dict = {
    'random_spikes': {'max_spikes_per_unit': 1000},
    'templates': {},
    'waveforms': {},
    'noise_levels': {},
    'correlograms': {},
    'spike_amplitudes': {},
    'spike_locations': {},
    'unit_locations': {},
    'template_simlarity': {},
}

analyzer.compute(extensions_dict)
```

If you have annoying things like motion, artefacts, seperate shanks, a custom probe, multiple recordings, etc you'll need to modify this simple pipeline. But this is a good starting point! The end goal of a SpikeInterface pipeline is the Sorting Analyzer - and we've just made one!

> While we were preprocessing and spike sorting on Monday and Tuesday, we used a 90 second snippet of a recording from Adrian Duszkiewicz available at [this DANDIlink](https://dandiarchive.org/dandiset/000939/0.260512.1701/files?location=sub-A3702). You can keep using this if you'd like. However, it will be more fun (and realistic) to use a longer recording. I've made an analyzer computed using the same recording as we used earlier in the week, but sorted using the full 2 hour duration of the recording. You can download it HERE, or it's also on a usb stick in the room! Whichever you decide to use, please make a note of where your analyzer is stored. We'll say that the analyzer is at `path/to/analyzer`. Change this when you see it.

Reviewer: is the analyzer particularly large? I wonder here if we just give them one option here avoid confusion (and then their outputs will look the same as the example images). Maybe like previously we used the 90 seconds but this is not enough data for a realistic curation experience. Here we will use this sorting analyzer....

```

When run, you should get a window that looks like this:

![A SpikeInterface-GUI window, with a custom layout](images/curate/custom_layout.png)

Nice! We used "zones" to define where things go. The zones are described in more detail on the [SpikeInterface-GUI GitHub page](https://github.com/SpikeInterface/spikeinterface-gui/). Roughly they are the eight boxes that make up the GUI:

```
+---------------+--------------+
| zone1   zone2 | zone3  zone4 |
+               +              +
| zone5   zone6 | zone7  zone8 |
+---------------+--------------+
```

You can also change settings in individual views, then go to the MainSettings View and click "Save as default settings".
:::

_Mantra of the day_: SpikeInterface-GUI is used to create a **Curation** file. 

So... what's a Curation. And why does it have a capital C?

# Why curate?

Spike sorters make mistakes -- sometimes lots of mistakes! So we need to look at the spike sorting output. Then we can adjust the sorter's default settings (then take a look at the results) in the hope that their output improves, or we can curate what comes out of them.

It's helpful to remind ourselves what the definition of "neuron" and "unit" are:

>   - **Neuron**: a neuron, an actual cell.

Reviewer: nice this is related to [this issue](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/course-ephys-osss/issues/26) on a glossary, and these definitions might be useful earlier in the course, we can think about how to present these

Author: Yes, let's leave a TODO to make sure this uses the glossary definitions (which will also remind us to add it to the glossary)

  - **Unit**: something a spike sorter thinks is a neuron

> Note that some people call units "clusters". The common "mistakes" that spike sorters make are:

Reviewer: Maybe newline before The common "mistakes"... ?

>   1) Include a unit which is clearly noise or an artefact

Reviewer: artefact as in stimulation artefact?

Author: I was thinking very generally: could be stimulation, some leftover electrical noise you've not dealt with properly, some very sudden motion etc. Maybe "caused by an artefact" is more general- I've updated to that.

  2) Take the spikes from one neuron but sorts them into two units (over-splitting)
  3) Takes the spikes from two neurons but sorts them into one unit (over-merging)

To counter these errors we need to

>   1) Label the units

Reviewer: *to indicate their quality (?)

  2) Merge over-split units
  3) Split over-merged units

In SpikeInterface a **Curation** is a list of decisions. These decisions are labels, merges and splits. As we proceed, we'll create **Curation**s by using the GUI or by using tools inside SpikeInterface.

# Manual Label

First, we will try to attach quality labels to units using some different approaches. The labels we'll use are

>   - "good" -- This unit looks like a single, well sorted neuron

Reviewer: could use : format for alignment with the Neuron: Unit: section above (maybe good mua etc these want bolding too?)

  - "mua" (multi-unit activity) -- This looks like a real neural signal, but it doesn't come from a single neuron
  - "noise" -- This does not come from a neural signal

::: {.callout-tip collapse="true"}

> ## The curation you use depends on your science

Reviewer: nice

> Suppose you are interested in very specific cells. Ones that only respond to certain stimuli and live in a specific brain area. You're expecting to get a handful of these per recording. In this case, your scientific question depends sensitively on the fact you're looking at a good unit. Hence you need to go in a surgically check that each unit you keep is "good".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you are interested in very specific cells. Ones that only respond to certain stimuli and live in a specific brain area. You're expecting to record from only a handful of these neurons per recording. In this case, your scientific question depends sensitively on the fact you're looking at a good unit. Hence you need to go in a surgically check that each unit you keep is "good".
```

> On the other hand, maybe you're doing population level questions. How does the overall firing rate different between brain states? What are the low-dimensional dynamics? In this case, the individual nature of each unit is less important (or can be important, depending on your methods...). Hence you can be a bit less careful: get rid of the stuff that's obviously noise and continue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, maybe you're doing population level questions. How does the overall firing rate different between brain states? What are the low-dimensional dynamics? In this case, the individual nature of each unit may be less important. Hence you can be a bit less careful: get rid of the stuff that's obviously noise and continue.
```

Overall, the curation you use depends on your scientific question and your downstream methods.
:::

To make a curation, we launch SpikeInterface-GUI in "curation" mode. We can do that either in the terminal

```{python}

> sigui --curation path/to/analyzer

Reviewer: If the full analyzer is not too large and we can get them all to use it, we could use the filename from the example file here?

```

> Or in a python script

Reviewer: This is slightly repeated from the above section.  Maybe the overall order could be:

i) merge reminder / why curate?
ii) merge the first half of manual label with the above
iii) Merge visualising the analyzer... merged with the second half of manual label...

```{python}
import spikeinterface.full as si
from spikeinterface_gui import run_mainwindow

sorting_analyzer = si.load('path/to/analyzer')
run_mainwindow(
    sorting_analyzer,
    curation=True
)
```

> "Curation mode" allows us to label units (and merge and split them). We can label a unit as "good" by typing "g", "mua" by typing "m" and "noise" by typing "n". We'll now all manually curate our analyzers. Here are some things to look out for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Curation mode" allows us to label units (and merge and split them). We can label a unit as "good" by typing "g", "mua" by typing "m" and "noise" by typing "n". We'll now all manually curate our analyzers. Next we will look at a number of features of the sorted units that can help us determine whether they are "good", "mua" or "noise":
```

### Curation: auto-correlograms

> After spiking, a neuron has to rest for a while. So if a unit has two spikes within e.g. 1ms of each other, that's a sign that something in the sorting has gone wrong. The auto-correlogram helps you see these "refractory period violations". To make the histogram in the auto-correlogram plot, you ask: how many spikes occur between 0-1ms after another spike. Then: how many spikes occurs between 1-2ms after another spike? Then 2-3ms? And so on. Here's a low-event histogram.

Reviewer: we could link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Refractory_period_(physiology) on [rest for a while]?

> After spiking, a neuron has to rest for a while. So if a unit has two spikes within e.g. 1ms of each other, that's a sign that something in the sorting has gone wrong. The auto-correlogram helps you see these "refractory period violations". To make the histogram in the auto-correlogram plot, you ask: how many spikes occur between 0-1ms after another spike. Then: how many spikes occurs between 1-2ms after another spike? Then 2-3ms? And so on. Here's a low-event histogram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After spiking, a neuron has to rest for a while. So if a unit has two spikes within e.g. 1ms of each other, that's a sign that something in the sorting has gone wrong as it is not physiologically possible for action potentials to fire that rapidly. The auto-correlogram helps you see these "refractory period violations". To make the histogram in the auto-correlogram plot, you ask: how many spikes occur between 0-1ms after another spike. Then: how many spikes occurs between 1-2ms after another spike? Then 2-3ms? And so on. Here's a low-event histogram.
```

> After spiking, a neuron has to rest for a while. So if a unit has two spikes within e.g. 1ms of each other, that's a sign that something in the sorting has gone wrong. The auto-correlogram helps you see these "refractory period violations". To make the histogram in the auto-correlogram plot, you ask: how many spikes occur between 0-1ms after another spike. Then: how many spikes occurs between 1-2ms after another spike? Then 2-3ms? And so on. Here's a low-event histogram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After spiking, a neuron has to rest for a while. So if a unit has two spikes within e.g. 1ms of each other, that's a sign that something in the sorting has gone wrong. 

The auto-correlogram helps you see these "refractory period violations". To make the histogram in the auto-correlogram plot, you ask: how many spikes occur between 0-1ms after another spike. Then: how many spikes occurs between 1-2ms after another spike? Then 2-3ms? And so on. Here's a low-event histogram.
```

> After spiking, a neuron has to rest for a while. So if a unit has two spikes within e.g. 1ms of each other, that's a sign that something in the sorting has gone wrong. The auto-correlogram helps you see these "refractory period violations". To make the histogram in the auto-correlogram plot, you ask: how many spikes occur between 0-1ms after another spike. Then: how many spikes occurs between 1-2ms after another spike? Then 2-3ms? And so on. Here's a low-event histogram.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to remove reference to 'histogram' here and refer to it as the autocorrelogram? (only if some are not familiar with histogram this could add a level of complexity)

![A simple auto-correlogram histogram. For this unit, ZERO spikes occured 0-1ms after another spike. Three spikes occured 1-2ms after another spike. Zero spikes occured 2-9ms after another spike, and one spike occured 9-10ms after another spike.](images/curate/curate_lilhist.png)

"Good" unit have no violations near 0ms. Many violations mean that the unit is contaminated with noise, or another unit. Here are a couple of examples:

![The auto-correlogram of a good unit](images/curate/curate_goodcorr.png)

![The auto-correlogram of a not-good unit](images/curate/curate_badcorr.png)

Whether the "not good" units should be labelled "noise" or "mua" will depend on other properties.

### Curation: templates

> The spatio-temporal electrical signal we measure when a neuron spikes is called a waveform. The "template" is the average of all these waveforms. For high-density probes (e.g. NeuroPixels, other probes etc) the signal is spread across many channels. A "good" unit should have a template that looks like an (extra-cellular) action potential. Here's an example, plotted with the probe map and with the "maximum signal channel" plotted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The spatio-temporal electrical signal we measure when a neuron spikes is called a waveform. The "template" is the average of all these waveforms. For high-density probes (e.g. Neuropixels) the signal is spread across many channels. A "good" unit should have a template that looks like an (extra-cellular) action potential. Here's an example, plotted with the probe map and with the "maximum signal channel" plotted:
```

I also could have sworn Neuropixels was branded as NeuroPixels! but it doesn't [appear to be](https://www.ucl.ac.uk/brain-sciences/neuropixels)

Author: yeah, I thought so too. Also not here: https://www.imec-int.com/en/expertise/health-technologies/neural-probes

> The spatio-temporal electrical signal we measure when a neuron spikes is called a waveform. The "template" is the average of all these waveforms. For high-density probes (e.g. NeuroPixels, other probes etc) the signal is spread across many channels. A "good" unit should have a template that looks like an (extra-cellular) action potential. Here's an example, plotted with the probe map and with the "maximum signal channel" plotted:

Reviewer: This is a good point that's not touched on anywhere as far as I know, the difference in signal between extracellular vs. intracellular and why the signal is inverted. Maybe one for the 'concept notes'? [TODO MAKE ISSUE]

![The template of a "good" unit](images/curate/curate_goodtemplate.png)

> We see that the purple unit location on the probe matches where the peak of the signal is on the template plot. This unit looks "good" (to me) because 1) it's temporally localized 2) it has spatial decay 3) it has a trough, then a peak 4) it goes to zero on both sides. Note on the "main channel" view we can see that the unit's extrema value is -60uV.

Reviewer: I wonder if it is worth spelling out exactly what this plot shows, just in case its not clear to newcomers to spike sorting i.e. the left plot shows different units max signal overlaid on the probe (channels are squares), the middle plot shows the individual `n` channels where the signal for that unit is meaningfully recorded, the right-hand plot shows the channel with the max signal

> We see that the purple unit location on the probe matches where the peak of the signal is on the template plot. This unit looks "good" (to me) because 1) it's temporally localized 2) it has spatial decay 3) it has a trough, then a peak 4) it goes to zero on both sides. Note on the "main channel" view we can see that the unit's extrema value is -60uV.

Reviewer: could be worth expanding with brackets what temporally localised and spatial decay (i.e. smooth decay across channels) mean

Here's clear noise:

![The template of a "noise" unit](images/curate/curate_noisetemplate.png)

Here, the signal is the same on all electrodes (no spatial decay), it's temporally quite wide, it doesn't reach zero.

Finally, something more ambiguous:

![The template of a ambiguous unit](images/curate/curate_ambigtemplate.png)

Here, there is some spatial decay. But temporally, it doesn't start from zero and it doesn't decay to zero smoothly. The unit's peak is about -20uV, so it's much smaller than the good unit we saw earlier. These small units are more likely to get some noise mixed into them (because they are harder to distinguish from noise). So maybe it's a real unit with some noise mixed in. Or maybe it's just a good unit which is further away from the probe. You need to look at more plots to decide on this one...

### Curation: spike distributions

TODO

> ## Exercise: manually curate the analyzer for 10 minutes

Reviewer: Currently I put these in 'Things to try' tip boxes (which I'm not particularly convinced with). Whatever the format we can align the presentation of exercises across the book [TODO MAKE ISSUE]

Jot down any units you were unsure what to do with and we'll take a look at them soon.

When you're done, export your curation using the "Export Curation" button. This will produce a json file containing your decisions.

# Automated labels with metrics

> Manual curation isn't fun. It also has genuine scientific issues: human decisions are flakey. If you do the same curation exercise tomorrow, you'll get a different result. If you're hungry, you'll probably be harsher on your units. If you've not seen a good unit for a while, you'll be desperate to label one as "good"! 

Reviewer: 😂

Author: it's true!!!

> Manual curation isn't fun. It also has genuine scientific issues: human decisions are flakey. If you do the same curation exercise tomorrow, you'll get a different result. If you're hungry, you'll probably be harsher on your units. If you've not seen a good unit for a while, you'll be desperate to label one as "good"! 

Reviewer: 'flakey' might not be clear (though accurate) for some attendees (e.g. English not first language) , maybe inconsistent or difficult to reproduce?

> So, we can try to automate the process. We'll try three different methods, all based on _metrics_.

Reviewer: above curation as a definition is bold, if metrics is used in a similar way (e.g. definition) it could be bold too?

In our context a metric is a number which measures a property of the spike sorted unit. Let's see some common examples (the text here is adapted from the [UnitRefine paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.03.30.645770v2) by Jain et. al.)

>   - Firing rate -- Average number of spikes in the cluster, per second.

Reviewer: maybe bold format with : as above?

>   - Firing rate -- Average number of spikes in the cluster, per second.

Reviewer: Even though this is very clear, I first read it for some reason as it would be an array of average spikes per second (e.g. mean spikes per 1s bin), and now my brain is melting trying to find a way to express it so that it doesn't sound like that 😅 probably okay to leave

Author: The number of spikes in the cluster divided by the length of the recording (in seconds).

?

>   - Firing rate -- Average number of spikes in the cluster, per second.

Reviewer: Add / remove capital first letter for consistency across points

>   - Signal to noise ratio (snr) -- the extremal amplitude of the template on the extremal channel, divided by the standard deviation of the noise on this channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Signal to noise ratio (SNR) -- the extremal amplitude of the template on the extremal channel, divided by the standard deviation of the noise on this channel.
```

>   - Signal to noise ratio (snr) -- the extremal amplitude of the template on the extremal channel, divided by the standard deviation of the noise on this channel.

Reviewer: Maybe this could be spelled out more to avoid double extremal?  e.g. the peak value of the template measured on the channel with the maximum signal for that unit,....

>   - Isi violation count -- The number of inter-spike-interval (isi) violations that occured for each cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ISI violation count -- The number of inter-spike-interval (ISI) violations that occurred for each cluster.
```

>   - Isi violation ratio -- Given the isi violations count, the isi violations ratio approximates the contamination rate of the cluster, assuming random contamination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ISI violation ratio -- Given the ISI violations count, the ISI violations ratio approximates the contamination rate of the cluster, assuming random contamination.
```

>   - Isi violation ratio -- Given the isi violations count, the isi violations ratio approximates the contamination rate of the cluster, assuming random contamination.

Reviewer: here could we link to the above section that explains the refectory period? Maybe in that section we could define ISI violiation

And some less common, but potentially just-as-important, ones:

>   - sd ratio -- Compute the spike amplitudes for a simulated cluster composed of many snippets of noise,  giving a noise-amplitude distribution. The sd ratio is equal to the standard deviation of the cluster's amplitude distribution divided by the standard deviation of the noise-amplitude distribution.

Reviewer: Maybe SD ratio?

>   - amplitude cutoff -- For each cluster, make a histogram of spike amplitude values. Assume the distribution is normally distributed and fit the distribution using the high-value tail. Under this assumption, estimate how many spikes are missing from the low-value tail. The amplitude cutoff is equal to the estimated fraction of spikes missing from the tail.

Reviewer: we could define histogram in the glossary / concept notes, possible issue?

>   - drift ptp --The difference between the maximum and minimum values in the spike location difference distribution.

Reviewer: not sure if it is worth expanding ptp as peak-to-peak somewhere

>   - drift ptp --The difference between the maximum and minimum values in the spike location difference distribution.

Reviewer: I think it might be worth expanding / linking to an explanation for the spike location difference distribution (I'm not familiar with what that is 😅)

Author: In some sense, I'm not too worried about these definitions. The main point is: there are lots of metrics about lots of things. Then there's references below for more details.

>   - sync\_n -- Take all spike times from cluster $I$. Count all spikes which occur at the same timepoint (sample) as at least $n-1$ spikes from all other clusters. sync\_n is equal to this count.

Reviewer: Because we don't use the mathematical prose elsewhere we could just say 'from a cluster'? (or a unit if we go for a single way of referring to units/clusters)

  - exp decay -- 

> Read more about the metrics either at the [UnitRefine paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.03.30.645770v2), or in the [SpikeInterface docs](https://spikeinterface.readthedocs.io/en/stable/modules/metrics.html). As you can see, they all measure properties of different stuff: the size of the signal, non-biological spike times, properties of the amplitude and depth distributions etc etc. There are around 40 metrics in SpikeInterface and each has its own intricacies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read more about the metrics either at the [UnitRefine paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.03.30.645770v2), or in the [SpikeInterface docs](https://spikeinterface.readthedocs.io/en/stable/modules/metrics.html). As you can see, they all measure properties that can help determine the physiological validity and SNR of units: the size of the signal, non-biological spike times, properties of the amplitude and depth distributions etc etc. There are around 40 metrics in SpikeInterface and each has its own intricacies.
```

> In SpikeInterface, the metrics are contained in extensions. At the moment we separate them into two groups: quality metrics and template metrics. Hence you can compute them in a similar way you computed everything else:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In SpikeInterface, the metrics are contained in extensions. At the moment we separate them into two groups: quality metrics and template metrics. Hence you can compute them in a similar way you computed other `SortingAnalyzer` extensions:
```

```{python}
sorting_analyzer.compute(['quality_metrics', 'template_metrics'])
```

> This will compute all the metrics which it can. The metrics you compute will depend on which other extensions you've computed. E.g. if you've not computed spike depths you won't get any of the drift metrics. If you've not computed noise levels, you won't get the signal-to-noise ratio. The other extensions we've computed already will give us access to most of the metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will compute all the metrics which it can—the metrics you compute will depend on which other extensions you've computed. e.g. if you've not computed spike depths you won't get any of the drift metrics. If you've not computed noise levels, you won't get the signal-to-noise ratio. The other extensions we've computed already will give us access to most of the metrics.
```

After you've computed them you can see the metrics in a pandas dataframe as follows:

```{python}

> all_metrics = si.get_metrics_extension_data(sorting_analyzer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all_metrics = si.get_metrics_extension_data(sorting_analyzer)
print(all_metrics)
```

```

## Thresholding

> The simplest approach is to _threshold_. This means: define some boundaries and only take units whose metrics live in those boundaries. Here's an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest approach to decide whether units are "good" based on metrics is to _threshold_. This means: define some boundaries and only take units whose metrics fall within those boundaries. Here's an example:
```

```{python}
qm_thresholds = {
    "snr": {"greater": 5},
    "firing_rate": {"greater": 0.1, "less": 200},
    "rp_contamination": {"less": 0.5}
}
```

> Based on these thresholds, we can get labels ("good" or "noise") for all your units:

Reviewer: can these also label as "mua"?

Author: Nope - it's deliberately very simple (more for teaching than real use).

```{python}
all_metrics = sorting_analyzer.get_metrics_extension_data()

> qm_labels = si.threshold_metrics_label_units(all_metrics, thresholds=qm_thresholds, column_name="simple_threshold")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
qm_labels = si.threshold_metrics_label_units(
    all_metrics, thresholds=qm_thresholds, column_name="simple_threshold"
)
```

(just to avoid having to scroll right in the book)

good_units = qm_labels.query('simple_threshold == "good"')
print(f"{len(good_units)}/{len(qm_labels)} are good!")
```

Finally, we can attach the labels to the `sorting_analyzer` and launch the GUI, allowing us to take a look at what we've done:

```{python}

> sorting_analyzer.set_sorting_property(key='simple_threshold', values=qm_labels['simple_threshold'].values.astype(str))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sorting_analyzer.set_sorting_property(
    key='simple_threshold', values=qm_labels['simple_threshold'].values.astype(str)
)
```

run_mainwindow(
    sorting_analyzer
)
```

Usually thresholding is a strict tool. Your unit has to pass every test you give it for it to be included as a good one. Sometimes you want to be more lenient with one threshold when another criteria is met. So generally, I would advise against simple thresholding. But it's a good place to start.

## Bombcell: _extreme_ Thresholding

> I think of Bombcell, developed here in UCL by Julie Fabre, as _extreme_ thresholding. Roughly your unit goes through a decision tree, and depending on the metrics, it will get a different label. The decision tree is carefully thought out and takes into account all sorts of things. Take a look at the decision tree on the [Bombcell GitHub page](https://github.com/Julie-Fabre/bombcell).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I think of Bombcell by Julie Fabre, as _extreme_ thresholding. Roughly your unit goes through a decision tree, and depending on the metrics, it will get a different label. The decision tree is carefully thought out and takes into account all sorts of things. Take a look at the decision tree on the [Bombcell GitHub page](https://github.com/Julie-Fabre/bombcell).
```

The book lives in its own dimension, in its own plain of existence? (maybe we can link to Julie's profile? actually also she's at Princeton now 😂 )

Reviewer: could expand/reword 'all sorts of things'?

> I think of Bombcell, developed here in UCL by Julie Fabre, as _extreme_ thresholding. Roughly your unit goes through a decision tree, and depending on the metrics, it will get a different label. The decision tree is carefully thought out and takes into account all sorts of things. Take a look at the decision tree on the [Bombcell GitHub page](https://github.com/Julie-Fabre/bombcell).

Reviewer: maybe quick example here? I think many will not be familiar with the decision tree concept

Author: No, they should look at the github page - it's very clear. I'll open it during the tutorial

The good news for us is that Julie agreed to port Bombcell over to SpikeInterface. Hence we can use it on our analyzer in a one-liner:

```{python}
bombcell_labels = si.bombcell_label_units(sorting_analyzer)
```

Let's take a look at the results:

```{python}

> sorting_analyzer.set_sorting_property(key='bombcell_labels', values==bombcell_labels['bombcell_label'].values.astype(str))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sorting_analyzer.set_sorting_property(
    key='bombcell_labels', values==bombcell_labels['bombcell_label'].values.astype(str)
)
```

run_mainwindow(
    sorting_analyzer
)
```

> There are also plotting tools so that you can see _why_ Bombcell labelled your units as it did. E.g. here is an "upset plot":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are also plotting tools so that you can see _why_ Bombcell labelled your units as it did. e.g. here is an "upset plot":
```

```{python}

> si.plot_bombcell_labels_upset(sorting_analyzer, unit_labels=bombcell_labels['bombcell_label'])

Reviewer: this didn't render for me, maybe I did something wrong on the build and/or we need `plt.show()`?

```

This tells us which metrics made units fail. After looking at your results, you might decide to change the default parameters. To do you, you can first check out the default params:

```{python}
# it's worth "pretty printing" this dict...
from pprint import pprint
default_thresholds = si.bombcell_get_default_thresholds()

> pprint(default_thresholds)

Reviewer: did this render for you? for some reason on my page this isn't rendered

Author: This page isn't run (because I don't want to add the analyzer to the github page). So during the tutorial students should run this code in a seperate notebook (which I'll also be doing)

    'mua': {
        'amplitude_cutoff': {'greater': None, 'less': 0.1},
        'amplitude_median': {'abs': True, 'greater': 30, 'less': None},
        'drift_ptp': {'greater': None, 'less': 100},
        'num_spikes': {'greater': 300, 'less': None},
        'presence_ratio': {'greater': 0.7, 'less': None},
        'rp_contamination': {'greater': None, 'less': 0.1},
        'snr': {'greater': 5, 'less': None}},
    'noise': {
        'exp_decay': {'greater': 0.01, 'less': 0.1},
        'num_negative_peaks': {'greater': None, 'less': 1},
        'num_positive_peaks': {'greater': None, 'less': 2},
        'peak_after_to_trough_ratio': {'greater': None, 'less': 0.8},
        'peak_to_trough_duration': {'greater': 0.0001, 'less': 0.00115},
        'waveform_baseline_flatness': {'greater': None, 'less': 0.5}},
    'non-somatic': {
        'main_peak_to_trough_ratio': {'greater': None, 'less': 0.8},
        'peak_before_to_peak_after_ratio': {'greater': None, 'less': 3},
        'peak_before_to_trough_ratio': {'greater': None, 'less': 3},
        'peak_before_width': {'greater': 0.00015, 'less': None},
        'trough_width': {'greater': 0.0002, 'less': None},
    }
}

> bombcell_labels = si.bombcell_label_units(

Reviewer: worth printing this?

    sorting_analyzer,
    thresholds = custom_thresholds
)
```

## UnitRefine: Train yourself out of a job

> In UnitRefine, we start with a small (say, 1000 units) manually labelled dataset. We then use machine learning to train a classifier based on this labelled data and the metrics of each unit. So these classifiers mimic the people who originally did the labelling. The hardest problem isn't training the classifiers - it's getting good labelled data. Studies show that humans agree approximately 80% of the time (), so this gives a ceiling on how well a classifier can mimic a group of manual curators.

Reviewer: Could link to the paper / repo here?

> In UnitRefine, we start with a small (say, 1000 units) manually labelled dataset. We then use machine learning to train a classifier based on this labelled data and the metrics of each unit. So these classifiers mimic the people who originally did the labelling. The hardest problem isn't training the classifiers - it's getting good labelled data. Studies show that humans agree approximately 80% of the time (), so this gives a ceiling on how well a classifier can mimic a group of manual curators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In UnitRefine, we start with a small (say, 1000 units) manually labelled dataset. We then use machine learning to train a classifier based on this labelled data and the metrics of each unit. So these classifiers mimic the people who originally did the labelling. 

The hardest problem isn't training the classifiers - it's getting good labelled data. Studies show that humans agree approximately 80% of the time (), so this gives a ceiling on how well a classifier can mimic a group of manual curators.
```

> In UnitRefine, we start with a small (say, 1000 units) manually labelled dataset. We then use machine learning to train a classifier based on this labelled data and the metrics of each unit. So these classifiers mimic the people who originally did the labelling. The hardest problem isn't training the classifiers - it's getting good labelled data. Studies show that humans agree approximately 80% of the time (), so this gives a ceiling on how well a classifier can mimic a group of manual curators.

Reviewer: I think missing reference here ()

Author: I've added a TODO...

> There are some pre-trained classifiers available on HuggingFaceHub from Anoushka Jain. The underlying data was curated by five different people. Let's try it out:

Reviewer: could link here?

```{python}
unitrefine_labels = si.unitrefine_label_units(
    sorting_analyzer,
    noise_neural_classifier="AnoushkaJain3/noise_neural_classifier_lightweight",
    sua_mua_classifier="AnoushkaJain3/sua_mua_classifier_lightweight",
)

sorting_analyzer.set_sorting_property(key='unitrefine_labels', values=unitrefine_labels['unitrefine_labels'].values.astype(str))
run_mainwindow(
    sorting_analyzer
)
```

The basic system we've used uses two binary classifiers: one classifies units into "noise" and "neural", the second into "sua" ("good") and "mua".

> Another option is to train your own classifier. When you train yourself you can use any labels, and any number of labels, that you'd like. I'll do a demo of this in the workshop. You can try it yourself by following the instructions on the [UnitRefine GitHub repo](https://github.com/anoushkajain/UnitRefine.git):, and there is also a [video tutorial](https://youtu.be/UKYDipSY7B4).

Reviewer: (possible issue) after the workshop we can remove workshop references?

## Comparing methods

We've now tried three labelling methods. And we've been storing their results in the analyzer. So we can compare them in the GUI. Here's a unit where all the methods disagree:

TODO

Which method do you agree with?

> # "Functional" Curation philosophy

Reviewer: Because it's been a little while since merge/split concept was introduced, maybe worth reminder the reader here that is what we are going to be doing so this will require re-assigning unit IDs

A quick philosophical break.

We use a "functional" curation approach. This means: don't edit the analyzer as you go. Instead, keep the original analyzer - treat it like raw data - then build a curation that you, at the last minute, can apply to it. When you apply it: make a new curated analyzer _and_ keep the original one. This is good for a few reasons:

>   - Data integrity: you don't edit your analyzer, which represents your spike sorting outputs

Reviewer: maybe bold : formatting?

  - Try different approaches: you can try out different things. Keep one manual Curation file and one Curation file generated by an alogorithm, then switch between them and check if your downstream scientific results don't change.
  - Change your mind: if you change your mind about your curation, you don't need to redo your sorting, you just need to edit your curation.

When labelling, there isn't much different between our approach and just editing the analyzer, but you feel the difference more when you merge and split.

We can now update our mantra:

_Mantra of the day_: SpikeInterface-GUI is used to create a **Curation** file, _not_ to edit an analyzer.

# Merging

> We'll try out some auto-merge tools from the GUI. Launch the gui using the "merge_focus" layout-preset as follows:

Reviewer: it is worth briefly mentioning again here that merging can be done manually but, as discussed above, automated approaches are preferred?

> ```

Reviewer: maybe `{python}` here just for the formatting?

sigui --curation --layout-preset merge_focus path/to/analyzer
```

> (As these cli commands get more complicated, you might see why you want to run SpikeInterface-GUI from a Python script rather than from terminal!)

Reviewer: we can define CLI somewhere maybe in the initial section

![SpikeInterface-GUI after you've computed some merges and displayed the potential matches. I've also adjusted my settings in the WaveformView so "overlap" is off.](images/curate/show_merges.png)

Once you've "accepted" the units you agree with, you can export a Curation file by clicking "Export json".

You can adjust the threshold for displaying potential merges, change the distance measurement, or completely change the method. Let's try the "slay" method, developed by Sai Koukuntla et. al. ([read more!](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.06.20.660590v1)).

![Units suggested by SLAy.](images/curate/slay.png)

> I find that SLAy usually gives results I trust, although perhaps it misses some units. Everything you see in the GUI, you can recreate in SpikeInterface using the `compute_merge_unit_groups` function:

Reviewer: as in misses potential merging of units?

```{python}
merge_unit_groups = si.compute_merge_unit_groups(
    sorting_analyzer,
    preset='slay',
)
print(merge_unit_groups)
```

Here are a two different workflows that you might try out.

  1. Using the GUI, find preset that gives you lots of potential merges. Manually go through these are "accept" the ones you agree with. 
  2. Using the GUI, adjust the parameters of your preset, and check the results. Keep adjusting the parameters until you agree with all decisions. Then using a Python script and SpikeInterface to automatically compute these merges and save them in a Curation.

> I use 2. with SLAy.

Reviewer: Currently we don't have authorship on each chapter but this would be nice for the personal touch (as above) and also attribution, I presume there is some way to do this in quarto [MAKE ISSUE]

Author: Yeah, I did debate this in my head. But I think it's nice that this is advice "from Chris". At least during the workshop it will obviously be me. Maybe we can edit this after the workshop.

# Splitting

> Finally, SpikeInterface-GUI allows you to split units which have been over-merged. The current generation of spike sorters are usually tuned to over-split units because manual merging is relatively easy. But manual splitting is difficult. Also, spikes which look "out of distribution" in some way are sometimes there for another reason: these events might be when the spikes overlap with spikes from another unit. Or they could be slightly deformed spikes taking place during sharp wave ripples. Overall: I don't recommend splitting.

Reviewer: Maybe just again spelling out that we are literally taking a unit with its `n` spikes and splitting those spikes so that we now assign them to two different units. This is kind of a hard thing to grasp I think when starting

> Finally, SpikeInterface-GUI allows you to split units which have been over-merged. The current generation of spike sorters are usually tuned to over-split units because manual merging is relatively easy. But manual splitting is difficult. Also, spikes which look "out of distribution" in some way are sometimes there for another reason: these events might be when the spikes overlap with spikes from another unit. Or they could be slightly deformed spikes taking place during sharp wave ripples. Overall: I don't recommend splitting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, SpikeInterface-GUI allows you to split units which have been over-merged. The current generation of spike sorters are usually tuned to over-split units because manual merging is easier than manual splitting. 

Also, spikes which look "out of distribution" in some way are sometimes there for another reason: these events might be when the spikes overlap with spikes from another unit. Or they could be slightly deformed spikes taking place during sharp wave ripples. Overall: I don't recommend splitting.
```

not sure about this suggestion

Reviewer: maybe "out of distribution" could be spelled out e.g. spikes that look like outliers compared to most other spikes in the unit

But if you insist, go into curation mode in the GUI and then you can select spikes in any of the "spikey" Views, and click "split"

![A unit being split into a happy unit, and a less happy one.](images/curate/split.png)

> These decisions will be entered into "CurationView" and you can, again, export the Curation as a json file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These decisions will be entered into "CurationView" and you can, again, export the Curation as a `json` file.
```

> These decisions will be entered into "CurationView" and you can, again, export the Curation as a json file.

Reviewer: Not sure if Curation should be bolded here (if not maybe it should not be upper case?)

# Make and apply a Curation

> You've curated your data. Congrats!!! After lunch we'll do some downstream analysis. For downstream analysis, you might want to use curated results. To do this, we'll load the original analyzer, load the curation, and apply the curation to the analyzer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've curated your data. Congrats!!! In the next section we'll do some downstream analysis. For downstream analysis, you might want to use curated results (i.e. only include the "good" units). To do this, we'll load the original analyzer, load the curation, and apply the curation to the analyzer:
```

```{python}
import spikeinterface.full as si

curation = si.load_curation("path/to/curation.json")
analyzer = si.load_sorting_analyzer("path/to/analyzer/")
curated_analyzer = si.apply_curation(analyzer)
```

This might take a little while: the analyzer has to recompute some extensions for the new units.

> If you were being strict, you might also delete "mua" units.

Reviewer: maybe 'depending on your requirements' and then link to that nice dropdown above?

There are different things you could do at this stage: just save the spikes, or export to another format. For this workshop, we're going to export the results so that they can be used with [Pynapple](). You'll learn more about Pynapple later. For now, let's try to convert the curated analyzer to a Pynapple TsGroup:

```{python}
spikes = si.to_pynapple_tsgroup(curated_analyzer)
```

(Actually you're going to stream a sorting directly from DANDI. But if you were doing it from your own data, this is what you'd do.)

> For me, this is the end of the spike sorting pipeline. You've investigated your ephys data, preprocessed it appropriately, sorted it, visualized the results, and curated them. Your data processing is over -- it's finally time to do some _neuroscience_!

Reviewer: 🎉
